# Chapter.5 - Induction and Recursion

## Section.1 Mathematical Induction

### 1.1 The Well-Ordering Property

- Every nonempty set of nonnegative integers has a least element.

- A set $S$ is said to be well-ordered if every nonempty subset of $S$ has a least element.

Why mathematical induction is valid?
>
> - Assume that there is at least one nonnegative integer $n$ for which $P(n)$ is false.
> - Let $S$ be the set of all nonnegative integers for which $P(n)$ is false.
>
>   Then $S$ is nonempty.
>
> - By the well-ordering property, $S$ has a least element, say $m$.
> - Since $P(0)$ is true, $m$ is positive, so $m - 1$ is a nonnegative integer.
> - Since $m - 1 < m$, $m - 1$ is not in $S$. So $P(m - 1)$ is true.
> - Since the implication $P(m - 1) \rightarrow P(m)$ is true, $P(m)$ must be true.
>
### 1.2 The first principle of mathematical induction

- $(P(1) \wedge \forall k(P(k)\rightarrow P(k+1)))\rightarrow \forall n P(n) $
>
> - Inductive base: Establish $P(1)$
> - Inductive step: Prove that $P(k)\rightarrow P(k+1)$ for $k\geqslant 1$
> - Conclusion: $P(n) \forall n \geqslant 1$

### 1.3 More general form

- $\forall n[n \geqslant k \rightarrow P(n)] $
>
> - Inductive base: Establish $P(k)$
> - Inductive step: Prove that $P(n)\rightarrow P(n+1)$ for $n\geqslant k$
> - Conclusion: $P(n) \forall n \geqslant k$

## Section.2 Strong Induction and Well-Ordering

### 2.1 The second principle of mathematical induction (Strong Induction,Complete Induction)

- $(P(n_0) \wedge \forall k(k\geqslant n_0 \wedge P(n_0) \wedge P(n_0+1) \wedge \cdots \wedge P(k)\rightarrow P(k+1)))\rightarrow \forall n(n\geqslant n_0 \rightarrow P(n)) $

> - Inductive base: Establish $P(n_0)$
> - Inductive step: Prove that $P(n_0) \wedge P(n_0+1) \wedge \cdots \wedge P(k)\rightarrow P(k+1)$ for $k\geqslant n_0$
> - Conclusion: $P(n) \forall n \geqslant n_0$
>
---
> Some items in example:
>
> polygon 多边形; side 边; vertex 顶点; diagonal 对角线; convex 凸的; concave 凹的; triangulation 三角剖分;
>
> LEMMA 1: Every simple polygon with at least four sides has an interior diagonal.
>
> Theorem 1: A simple polygon with $n$ sides, where $n$ is an integer with $n\geqslant 3$, can be triangulated into $n-2$ triangles.(Use Strong Induction to prove it)

In fact, **mathematical induction**, **strong induction**, and **well-ordering** are all equivalent principles.

## Section.3 Recursive Definitions and Structural Induction

### 3.1 Recursive Definitions

- In a recursive definition, a function or a set is defined in terms of itself.
- Recursively defined functions, with the set of nonnegative integers as the domain:
>
> - $f(0)$ is defined to be a particular number.
> - $f(n)$ is defined in terms of $f(n-1)$, for all integers $n\geqslant 1$.
>
- Recursively defined functions are well-defined.

> Let $P(n)$ be the statement that "$f$ is well-defined at $n$".
>
> - P(0) is true, since $f(0)$ is defined to be a particular number.
> - For all integers $n\geqslant 1$, if $P(n-1)$ is true, since $f(n)$ is defined in terms of $f(n-1)$, then $P(n)$ is true.

### 3.2 The Complexity of Euclidean algorithm

***LAME's theorem***: The number of steps required by the Euclidean algorithm to compute the greatest common divisor of two positive integers $m$ and $n$, where $a\geqslant b$, is at most five times the number of digits in $b$.

> Proof: Recall that when the Euclidean algorithm is applied to find $gcd(a,b)$, with $a\geqslant b$, this sequence of equations (where $a=r_0$ and $b=r_1$) is obtained:
>  
> - $r_0 = r_1q_1 + r_2$  ,  $0\leqslant r_2 < r_1$
> - $r_1 = r_2q_2 + r_3$  ,  $0\leqslant r_3 < r_2$
> - $\cdots$
> - $r_{n-2} = r_{n-1}q_{n-1} + r_n$  ,  $0\leqslant r_n < r_{n-1}$
> - $r_{n-1} = r_nq_n$
>  
> So $r_n$ is $gcd(a,b)$. Beacuse $r_i>r_{i+1}$, so $q_{i+1}\geqslant 2$.
>
> - $r_n\geqslant 1 = f_2$
> - $r_{n-1}\geqslant 2r_n \geqslant 2f_2\geqslant f_3$
> - $r_{n-2}\geqslant r_{n-1}+r_n \geqslant f_2+f_3\geqslant f_4$
> - $\cdots$
> - $r_1\geqslant r_2+r_3 \geqslant f_{n-1}+f_n\geqslant f_{n+1}$
>
> Hence, $b=r_1\geqslant f_{n+1}$.
>
> Because $f_{n+1} > \frac{(1+\sqrt{5})}{2}\cdot f_n > [\frac{(1+\sqrt{5})}{2}]^{n-1}$ $\Rightarrow$ $\lg b > (n-1)\lg \frac{(1+\sqrt{5})}{2}> \frac{n-1}{5}$ $\Rightarrow$ $n<5\lg b + 1$.
>
> Suppose that $b$ has $k$ digits, so $b < 10^k$, then $ \lg b < k$, so $n<5k + 1$.
>
> So $n\leqslant 5k$.
>
> Q.E.D.
>
So the complexity of Euclidean algorithm is $O(\log b)$.

### 3.3 Recursive Definitions of Sets

Sets can also be defined recursively:

> - Basis step: Specify an initial collection of elements.
> - Recursive step: Describe how new elements can be formed from the elements already known to be in the set.
>
Exclusion rule: the set contains nothing other than those elements specified in the basis step and generated by applications of the rules in the recursive step.（有且仅有初值和递归规则生成的元素）

> The set of rooted trees, extended binary trees, full binary trees, and binary search trees can all be defined recursively.
